# Final Project

WARNING: This repo is a website that is hosted online by GitHub. The outside
world can see this website, so please keep that in mind as you add
content, write commit messages, etc.

## Introduction

In this project, you will carry out and document a data exploration
of your choice equivalent to 2-3 labs. This involves the following steps:

- Identify a motivating problem read a scholarly article about the problem
- Develop a hypothesis to replicate or extend prior work
- Identify or compile appropriate data to address hypothesis
- Use Tableau Public to visually explore the data with multiple visualizations
- Use python to compute summary statistics about the main insight
- Use python to plot the summarized data
- Document the above exploration process and conclusion online
- Submit your completed project to GitHub by the end of final exam slot
  for CMPSC 105, Spring 2024 (Tuesday, May 7 at 11:59am EDT).

## Learning outcomes

The learning objective addressed by this assignment are:

- Developing hypotheses based on motivating problems and/or observations and
  identify appropriate data to address hypotheses.
- Identifying and describing key elements in different types of data
  visualizations.
- Using web-based platforms to accurately present data sets through multiple
  visualizations.
- Using an open-source programming language to compute summary statistics and
  visualize key patterns in the data.
- Contributing to and presenting structured, web-based documentation that
  describes data exploration steps and visualization-based conclusions.

## Detailed TODOs

### Preliminary work

In this project, you will carry out and document a data exploration
of your choice equivalent to 2-3 labs. The final product will be a
narrative about your data that is revealed by the exploration process.
The narrative will be available online and contain writing and
visualizations.

To begin, please identify a problem or issue that motivates you. For example,
music that is generated by a computer seems inexpressive.
Biodiversity is ... Athletic abilities are ... Next, locate and
read a scholarly article about the issue. As you read, please note the
data used by the article, the analysis approaches taken by the article, and
the narrative that is constructed.

Create a hypothesis motivated by the article. You may retest
and replicate something in the article, you may extend an analysis that
is done, or you may try to falsify a claim made by the article.

Once you have a problem and vision of what you would like to show, please
search for data that can be used to answer you question. Alternatively,
come up with a plan to compile data from reputable sources into a dataset
that you can use to answer your question.

Before continuing, think about the broader significance if you find that
your hypothesis is accepted or rejected. What recommendations
could you make to others if your hypothesis is correct or incorrect?

While this final project will not require explicit hypothesis testing,
thinking in this framework is required to tell a compelling and complete story.
It may be the case that your hypothesis is incorrect, but having it as a guide
will be useful for constructing a narrative, writing about the process,
and explaining your work to others.

### Turn the Repo into a website, then clone the repo

- TODO: Before cloning, in GitHub, go to settings>pages. Under branch, click
  `main` and then `save`. Refresh after 30-60 seconds to get live link!
- TODO: Clone your repo using git - steps outlined below
- TODO: in GitHub, copy the SSH link to your repo from the green `code` button
- TODO: Open a terminal
- TODO: `cd` to a location where you would like to store the project repo
- TODO: type `git clone` then paste in the link
- TODO: in spyder, open a new project from existing directory.
- navigate to this lab and then hit create. You should then see all your files
  in the left hand panel

### Use Tableau Public to visually explore the data

With data and a question in hand, use tableau public to begin your data
exploration.

- TODO: Please make at least one visualization that helps you understand
  the data and advance your narrative.
- TODO: In Tableau Public, label all axes and title all figures.
- TODO: Make legends and any annotations as needed to make the figures
  as clear as possible.
- TODO: Publish the figures to tableau public (dashboard optional)
- TODO: retrieve an embed link to use within your project narrative as either
  the primary figure, an analysis figure, or an appendix figure

### Use python to compute summary statistics about the main insight

Once you have an insight about your data, use the provided python code
in the Spyder IDE to further process the data.

- TODO: run the `source/example.py` and verify that the code works as expected
- TODO: duplicate the `example.py` in the `source` directory
- TODO: name your file `final.py` in the `source` directory
- TODO: upload your own data file to `assets/data`
- TODO: ensure your data file has the name `data.csv`
- TODO: ensure that your data has headings in the first row
- TODO: ensure that none of the headings have spaces
- TODO: edit lines as needed in `final.py` to read your `data.csv`
- TODO: sanity check the `datamat` to make sure that your data is there
- TODO: based on prior exploration or exploration done within `final.py`
  reduce your data to the simplest summary statistic that represents
  your insight.
- TODO: in `final.py` make the simplest figure to show your insight.
- TODO: ensure that the figure is fully labeled
- TODO: save the figure in `assets/images` as `spyder.jpg`. The extension
  does not have to be exact.
- NOTE: if your most simplified insight was already shown with Tableau, you
  must still make a figure with Spyder to add to your narrative or the appendix

### Document the above exploration process and conclusions

- TODO: Add content to the markdown pages in the `_report` directory
- The files named 00-07 will be combined into one report that is shown on the
  website. Check inside each file to find further instructions.
   
### Submit work to GitHub using git

- Open a terminal
- `cd` to the project directory on your computer
- type `git status` to see a list of files you have updated
- type `git add .` to "stage" your files
- type `git commit -m "message`
- type `git push origin main`
- type your ssh passphrase if requested
- wait approx 20 seconds and check GitHub Actions build status
- refresh your website page to view changes

### Before the final submission

- Please check the gatorgrade report in GitHub Actions and resolve
  any issues, including completing and deleting all TODO markers.
- TODO: Resubmit work to GitHub using git as needed

### References

- [Starter Repo for reference](https://github.com/allegheny-college-cmpsc-105-spring-2024/data-insight-starter)
- [Starter Website url](https://allegheny-college-cmpsc-105-spring-2024.github.io/data-insight-starter/)
